# wetland-ml-classifier
A machine learning model for the classification of wetland properties in the North Thompson River watershed. 

This project examines the spatial and temporal dynamics of wetland connectivity in the North Thompson River Watershed using satellite imagery. Connectivity governs the degree of connection between wetlands to other water bodies, such as rivers and streams. In particular, floodplain wetlands in the North Thompson River experience seasonal fluctuations in connectivity as a variable of main channel discharge. Wetlands often disconnect during periods of low streamflow and reconnect with increased precipitation, discharge, or snowmelt.

Some fish species, such as the juvenile Coho salmon, utilize wetlands in the North Thompson River year-round as rearing habitats. Connected floodplains provide ample food sources and reduce competition and predation pressures often present in the main channels, thus supporting large populations of salmonids. Warm temperatures and stable flow and turbidity conditions in wetlands often favour fish growth and refugia. On the other hand, a disconnected wetland can isolate fish populations from their main channel habitats. Prolonged isolation might lead to higher mortality rates due to low dissolved oxygen levels or excessively high temperatures. However, wetland-mainstem connectivity impacts are often complex and non-linear. As a result, the connectivity of wetlands carries significant implications for the growth and survival of salmon.

As a first step towards understanding connectivity, here, we demonstrate the acquisition, preparation, and processing of satellite imagery to observe the spatial and seasonal inundation patterns in North Thompson wetlands. A Random Forest classifier is trained using ground-truth data collected from four wetland sites along the North Thompson River mainstem (Cook, Pyramid, Goose, Tum Tum) from July 7-11, 2025 using a Trimble R12i system. Additional training data were later added by desktop digitization. Model predictors include the Blue, Red, Green, and NIR bands from PlanetScope imagery acquired as closely to fieldwork dates and with as little cloud coverage as possible. Due to license requirements of PlanetScope, the imagery folder has been omitted from the public repository. All other data requirements, including ground truth and additional desktop-digitized data, have been included. 

Given that this model currenly serves as a preliminary proof of concept for the application of geospatial techniques to wetland and fish habitat quantification, more work is needed to improve the classification accuracy. In the coming weeks, I will improve hyperparameter tuning, incorporate DEM metrics as a model feature, and conduct a multi-spatial and temporal extrapolation of the model.



